                                                 of Edinburgh, Session 1869-70.                                                          63
                  irrespectively of the direction of the stream lines in its neighbour-
                  hood ; a result easily deduced from the elementary formula for fluid
                  pressure in hydrokinetics.
                      I have long ago shown that an elongated diamagnetic body in a
                  uniform magnetic field tends, as tends an elongated ferromagnetic
                  body, to place its length along the lines of force. Hence a long
                  solid, pivoted on a fixed axis through its middle in a uniform stream
                  of liquid, tends to place its length perpendicularly across the direc-
                  tion of motion ; a known result (Thomson & Tait's " Natural Philo-
                  sophy/' § 335). Again, two globes held in a uniform stream with
                  the lines joining their centres, require force to prevent them from
                  mutually approaching one another. In the magnetic analogue, two
                  spheres of diamagnetic or ferromagnetic inductive capacity repel
                  one another when held in a line at right angles to the lines of
                  force. A hydrokinetic result similar to this for the case of two
                  equal globes, is to be found in Thomson and Tait's " Natural Philo-
                  sophy/' § 332.
                      IV. (Proposition.) If the second body considered in § III., that is
                  to say, a body either having no apertures, or, if perforated, having
                  no circulation through the apertures, be acted on by one system of
                  forces applied so as always to balance the resultant of the fluid
                  pressure, calculated for it according to I I . and III. for whatever
                  position it may come to at any time, and if it be influenced, besides,
                  by any other system of applied forces, superimposed on the former,
                   it will move just as it would move, under the influence of the latter
                  system of forces alone, were the fluid at rest, except in so far as
                  compelled to move by the body's own motion through it. A parti-
                  cular case of this proposition was first published many years ago, by
                  Professor James Thomson, on account of which he gave the name
                  of " vortex of free mobility " to the cyclic irrotational motion sym-
                  metrical round a straight axis,

                  4. On the Equilibrium of Vapour at a Curved Surface of
                            Liquid. By Sir William Thomson.
                    In a closed vessel containing only a liquid and its vapour, ail at
                  one temperature, the liquid rests, with its free surface raised or
                  depressed in capillary tubes and in the neighbourhood of the solid
                  boundary, in permanent equilibrium according to the same law of

Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Monash University, on 02 Apr 2017 at 14:06:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0370164600041729
                   64                          Proceedings of the Boyal Society
                  relation between curvature and pressure as in vessels open to the
                  air. The permanence of this equilibrium implies physical equi-
                  librium between the liquid and the vapour in contact with it at all
                  parts of its surface. But the pressure of the vapour at different
                  levels differs according to hydrostatic law. Hence the pressure of
                  saturated vapour in contact with a liquid differs according to the
                  curvature of the bounding surface, being less when the liquid is
                  concave, and greater when it is convex. And detached portions of
                  the liquid in separate vessels all enclosed in one containing vessel,
                  cannot remain permanently with their free surfaces in any other
                  relative positions than those they would occupy if there were hydro-
                  static communication of pressure between the portions of liquid
                  in the several vessels. There must be evaporation from those
                  surfaces which are too high, and condensation into the liquid at
                  those surfaces which are too low—a process which goes on until
                  hydrostatic equilibrium, as if with free communication of pressure
                  from vessel to vessel, is attained. Thus, for example, if there are
                  two large open vessels of water, one considerably above the other
                  in level, and if the temperature of the surrounding matter is kept
                   rigorously constant, the liquid in the higher vessel will gradually
                   evaporate until it is all gone and condensed into the lower vessel.
                   Or if, as illustrated by the annexed diagram, a capillary tube, with
                   a small quantity of liquid occupying it from its bottom up to a
                   certain level, be placed in the neighbourhood of a quantity of the
                   same liquid with a wide free surface, vapour will gradually become
                   condensed into the liquid in the capillary tube until the level of
                   the liquid in it is the same as it would be were the lower end of
                   the tube in hydrostatic communication with the large mass of
                   liquid. Whether air be present above the free surface of the
                   liquid in the several vessels or not, the condition of ultimate
                   equilibrium is the same; but the processes of evaporation and
                   condensation through which equilibrium is approached will be
                   very much retarded by the presence of air. The experiments of
                   Graham, and the kinetic theory of Clausius and Maxwell, scarcely
                   yet afford us sufficient data for estimating the rapidity with which
                   the vapour proceeding from one of the liquids will diffuse itself
                   through the air and reach the surface of another liquid at a lower
                   level. With air at anything approaching to ordinary atmospheric


Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Monash University, on 02 Apr 2017 at 14:06:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0370164600041729
                                                of Edinburgh, Session 1869-70.                                                          65
                  density to resist the process, it is probable it would be too slow to
                  show any results unless in very long continued experiments. But
                  if the air be removed as perfectly as can be done by well-known
                  practical methods, it is probable that the process will be very
                  rapid: it would, indeed, be instantaneous, were it not for the cold
                  of evaporation in one vessel and the heat of condensation in the
                  other. Practically, then, the rapidity of the process towards
                  hydrostatic equilibrium through vapour between detached liquids,
                  depends on the rate of the conduction of heat between the several
                  surfaces through intervening solids and liquids. Without having




                   made either the experiment, or any calculations on the rate of con-
                   duction of heat in the circumstances, I feel convinced that in a
                   very short time water would visibly rise in the capillary tube indi-
                   cated in the diagram, and that, provided care is taken to maintain
                   equality of temperature all over the surface of the hermetically
                   sealed vessel, the liquid in the capillary tube would soon take very
                   nearly the same level as it would have were its lower end open;
                   sinking to this level if the capillary tube were in the beginning filled
                   too full, or rising to it if (as indicated in the diagram) there is not
                   enough of liquid in it at first to fulfil the condition of equilibrium.

Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Monash University, on 02 Apr 2017 at 14:06:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0370164600041729
                    66                         Proceedings of the Royal Society
                      The following formula show precisely the relations between
                   curvatures, differences of level, and differences of pressure, with
                   which we are concerned.
                      Let p be the density of the liquid, and a that of the vapour; and
                   let T be the cohesive tension of the free surface, per unit of breadth,
                   in terms of weight of unit mass, as unit of force. Let h denote
                   the height of any point, P, of the free surface above a certain plane
                   of reference, which I shall call for brevity the plane level of the
                   free surface. This will be sensibly the actual level of the free
                   surface in regions, if there are any, with no part of the edge (or
                   bounding line of the free surface where liquid ends and solid
                   begins) at a less distance than several centimetres. Lastly, let
                   r and r' be the principal radii of curvature of the surface at P.
                   By Laplace's well-known law, we have, as the equation of equi-
                   librium,
                                                       ( ; i )                     (1).

                   Now, in the space occupied by vapour, the pressure is less at the
                   higher than at the lower of two points whose difference of levels is h,
                   by a difference equal to ah. And there is permanent equilibrium
                   between vapour and liquid at all points of the free surface. Hence
                   the pressure of vapour in equilibrium is less at a concave than at a
                   plane surface of liquid, and less at a plane surface than at a con-
                                                                                                m
                   vex surface, by differences amounting to                                              per unit difference
                                                                                              p-cr
                   of curvature. That is to say, if -& denote the pressure of vapour in
                   equilibrium at a plane surface of liquid, and p the pressure of
                   vapour of the same liquid at the same temperature presenting a
                   curved surface to the vapour, we have

                                                                            p-<r

                   - and -, being the curvatures in the principal sections of the sur-
                   face bounding liquid and vapour, reckoned positive when concave
                   towards the vapour.
                      In strictness, the value of o- to be used in these equations, (1)
                   and (2), ought to be the mean density of a vertical column of
                   vapour, extending through the height h from the plane of reference.


Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Monash University, on 02 Apr 2017 at 14:06:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0370164600041729
                                                of Edinburgh, Session 1869-70.                                                           67
                   But in all cases to which we can practically apply the formulae,
                   according to present knowledge of the properties of matter, the
                   difference of densities in this column is very small, and may be
                   neglected. Hence, if H denote the height of an imaginary homo-
                   geneous fluid above the plane of reference, which, if of the same
                   density as the vapour at that plane, would produce by its weight
                   the actual pressure «r, we have

                                                                        "IT
                   Hence by (1) and (2)


                      For vapour of water at ordinary atmospheric temperatures, H is
                   about 1,300,000 centimetres. Hence, in a capillary tube which
                   would keep water up to a height of 13 metres above the plane
                   level, the curved surface of the wTater is in equilibrium with the
                   vapour in contact with it, when the pressure of the vapour is less
                   by about xoVo"^ °f ^ s o w n amount than the pressure of vapour in
                   equilibrium at a plane surface of water at the same temperature.
                      For water the value of T at ordinary temperatures is about -08 of
                   a gramme weight per centimetre; and p, being the mean of a
                   cubic centimetre, in grammes, is unity. The value of a for vapour
                   of water, at any atmospheric temperature, is so small that we may
                   neglect it altogether in equation (1). In a capillary tube thoroughly
                   wet with water, the free surface is sensibly hemispherical, and
                   therefore r and rr are each equal to the radius of the inner surface
                   of the liquid film lining the tube above the free liquid surface; we
                  •have, therefore,
                                                                    h = -08 x - .
                                                                                        r
                   Hence, if h = 1300 centimetres, r = -00012 centimetres. There can
                   be no doubt but that Laplace's theory is applicable without serious
                   modification even to a case in which the curvature is so great (or
                   radius of curvature so small) as this. But in the present state of
                   our knowledge we are not entitled to push it much further. The
                   molecular forces assumed in Laplace's theory to be " insensible at
                   sensible distances," are certainly but little, if at all, sensible at
                   distances equal to or exceeding the wave lengths of ordinary light.
                   This is directly proved by the most cursory observation of soap

Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Monash University, on 02 Apr 2017 at 14:06:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0370164600041729
                   68                         Proceedings of the Royal Society
                  bubbles. But the appearances presented by the black spot which
                   abruptly ends the series of colours at places where the bubble
                  is thinnest before it breaks, make it quite certain that the action
                  of those forces becomes sensible at distances not much less than a
                  half wave length, or ¥-Q o~o o" o f a centimetre. There is, indeed,
                  much and multifarious evidence that in ordinary solids and liquids,
                  not merely the distances of sensible inter-molecular action, but the
                  linear dimensions of the molecules themselves, and the average
                  distance from centre to nearest centre,* are but very moderately
                  small in comparison with the wave lengths of light. Some
                  approach to a definite estimate of the dimensions of molecules
                  is deducible from Clausius' theory of the average spaces travelled
                  without collision by molecules of gases, and Maxwell's theory
                  and experiments regarding the viscosity of gases. Having
                  perfect confidence in the substantial reality of the views which
                  these grand investigations have opened to us, I find it scarcely
                  possible to admit that there can be as many as 1027 molecules in
                  a cubic centimetre of liquid carbonic acid or of water. This makes
                  the average distance from centre to nearest centre in the liquids
                  exceed a thousand-millionth of a centimetre !
                     We cannot, then, admit that the formulce which I have given
                  above are applicable to express the law of equilibrium between the
                  moisture retained by vegetable substances, such as cotton cloth or
                  oatmeal, or wheat-flour biscuits, at temperatures far above the
                  dew point of the surrounding atmosphere. But although the
                  energy of the attraction of some of these substances for vapour
                  of water (when, for example, oatmeal, previously dried at a high
                  temperature, has been used, as in the original experiment of Sir J.
                  Leslie, to produce the freezing of water under the receiver of an air-
                  pump), is so great that it might almost claim recognition from
                  chemists as due to a " chemical affinity," and resulting in a " chemi-
                  cal combination," I believe that the absorption of vapour into
                  fibrous and cellular organic structures is a property of matter
                  continuous with the absorption of vapour into a capillary tube
                  demonstrated above.

                     * B 7 "average distance from centre to nearest centre," I mean the side of
                  the cube in a cubic arrangement of a number of points equal to the number
                  of real molecules in any space.


Downloaded from https:/www.cambridge.org/core. Monash University, on 02 Apr 2017 at 14:06:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0370164600041729
